# Of the Conquest of Dríthu

In TY 871, the Terethim liberated Hethívíll, the last of the surrounding islands near Anath. Aldeïr, who led the fleet of the Tereth, inquired of Éleos how they should proceed. Éleos spoke to him:

“The pool in Anath is the heart of the land, indeed, the heart of all this world. As it goes, so goes the rest. But this world lies under my wrath, and I will not permit it to continue in a form known to men. Strike at Dríthu and destroy the temple at the pool. Stop up the spring at the heart of the pool with your sword, and I will deliver the people and the lands of Anath into your hands.”

Now Dríthu and the pool lay far in the north of Anath on a high mountain. Aldeïr and his men sailed around the island to the east of the Wall of Storms, at its highest and fiercest point. For the second and last time since Anath raised the wall, it was crossed. But where Tereth had passed by only quietly, so that it could have gone unnoticed, the Crossing of the Terethim came in great glory. As soon as the first of the ships came to the swirling clouds, with the priests singing the War Song of Éleos, the clouds were torn like a grey veil, and the lightnings ceased, and the sun rose in furious brightness behind them. A fleet of Anath fishing boats saw them, and they fled in terror.

Then the Terethim sailed around to the north of Anath, and they landed under the high mountain on which sat Dríthu and the pool. There was no way of ascent except by the gated road on the east of the city, for the sides of the mountain were steep and treacherous. So Aldeïr called upon Éleos, and the sea elves were sent forth from the deep. By their magic they caused the ships of the Terethim to sail through the air until they came above Dríthu at dawn. The sight of the Wind Sailers, as the warriors in this battle came to be known, set the Anathim into chaos and fear, and many fled. But those who remained summoned all of their magical arts, and the conflict lit up the mountain so that the inhabitants of the lower lands mistook it for the sun. But the warriors of the Terethim, forbidden by Éleos, used no magic at all. They leapt from their vessels and in terrible wrath came upon the Anathim. Shorly before evening fell, Aldeïr himself was slain by a ravaging curse. But a young man with him, whose name is forgotten among the Terethim, took up the sword of Aldeïr, fought his way into the Temple in a blinding rage, and plunged the sword down into the spring at the heart of the pool.

No sooner had the blade touched the water than there was a great earthquake. Cliffs on the mountain began to crack and shatter, and the waters of the pool swelled and bubbled. The climbing water suddenly poured from the Temple in a blast, and quickly the whole city was washed clean. The waters continued to rise and run down the mountain, and they turned red with blood, the blood of the defeated Anathim mingled with the blood of their sacrificial victims. But the warriors of the Terethim boarded their ships again at the first drops of the deluge, and they sailed down the mountain to join the women and children awaiting their return.
