# Of the Nations of Anmahta at the Time of Tereth

An account of the nations of Anmahta as they stood when Eléos called Tereth out of Anath:

## Aeírwá

Aeírwá was the oldest nation of Teretz, being established shortly after the Rending. As some men began to travel out of Lanísan, no few remained, being pleased with the land. These built cities and great works, achieving even before the elves glories which all later ages envied. But when the elves came, it was to Lanísan first of all, for it was the most populous land. With the aid of the elves the cities and works became even greater, so that Anndri, the River City, was sometimes called Myü Gra (New Eden). Anndri was made the capital of Aeírwá, first and greatest of the nations of Teretz. There was the worship of Eléos held purest for generations, and they strove longest of coastal nations against the Anathim. Many splendid tales remain of their wars against Anath. Most famous among them is the Battle of Andaimé, in which Elaphíl the Hardy perished to defend the great River Tower from the black fire of Anath.

## Noëlunn

Aeírwa is bounded at the northeast by the river Hyêmi, beyond which forests thicken, rivers multiply, and the coastline lengthens. The men who moved here became great mariners, and scraps of lore tell that among them some few passed far beyond Anmahta to discover the two Teretzan continents of which no tales are known in our world. On a cliff at the eastmost edge of the ocean, they built the city of Miẅenâ. So the sea people were united to the banner of their lords at Miẅenâ and became the nation of Noëlunn. Miẅenâ was their only great city, but it was fair and tall and strong. The people of Noëlunn were a simple and happy folk, being largely ignored by the tyranny of the Anathim. Nonetheless they were not always faithful to Eléos. For the Noëlunnim were the first to worship the sea elves, by which error the great kingdom of Ôbemírach was mortally wounded.

## Négzam

Négzam is a small country to the northwest of Aeírwá. It was settled mostly by wanderers, exiles, and even outlaws who held no love for Aeírwá but could not or would not pass into Ménêth. Life there was simple but hard, and the Négzamin were a gloomy folk. They had little crime, but this often from fear, not good-will. Every clan saw to its own, and few showed hospitality or generosity. Instead those who came unbidden to land not their own were met with questions, threats, or even death. If every any business arose concerning the whole people, the heads of each clan would travel to the capital city of Fêmánk for a gathering. They had no king or any lords, and most decrees of a gathering were made by the appeal of strong words and a mighty will. The Négzamin detested the Anathim but also feared not Eléos. They cared for nothing beyond their borders and indeed could not even be bought. No tales are known of Négzam except for a single, very late, war with Aeírwá and for their role in the journey of Kaulav of Addríel to Sümlamené.

## Ménerâch

After the coming of the elves, men were able to pass into Ménêth. At first few would stay, most being eager to move on to more friendly land to the west. But those who tried to settle there became elf-friends and learned from them the art of stonecraft, so that they became mighty masters of rock. On the lower peaks they carved out whole cities, hard and glorious strongholds cut cleanly out of mountain flesh. In time there were several cities as these, and they joined themselves as the League of Ménerâch. The highest and largest of these cities, Vaëlü, became the capital, whence reigned their first king, Auvirân. For many years the Ménerâchim valiantly resisted the Anathim, but in time King Hyolphü was purchased by multiplied threats and promises. So Ménerâch became a chief ally of Anath and a terror to its own neighbors.

## Adir Chlif 

As Ménerâch grew in might and severity, some of its clans despised the League and its king. These traveled further west and began to settle in small, independent tribes. From time to time they came together for common affairs, but daily they lived as free men, under neither king nor court. They came to be named the tribes of Adir Chlif, that is, the Free North. Rarely do they enter into any tales, for they clung closely to their hills and did not often go beyond nor permit strangers to pass. For a time they continued to worship Eléos, but their fear of domination grew, until at least even Eléos seemed to them a hateful tyrant. In time, they abolished all festivals and services in His honor, though they had not heard word from Him or from the elves for over a hundred years. In almost every generation, the kings of Ménerâch tried to subjugate the free tribes, but the people were swift and alert. The Ménerâchim would attack, ubt the tribes had passed on.

## Addríel

Addríel was the most famous city-state in Anmahta, settled by fugitives from Ménerâchim who found no home elsewhere with the outcasts of Adir Chlif, where any aid to the Ménerâchim was forbidden. These exiles settled along the banks of the river Ellîb and were skilled in every craft. They came to the hill within its great southern bend and built a city greater than all which were ever seen west of Aeírwá. The towers were raised to a tremendous height, so that legend holds they could be seen even as far as Aeké. And Addríel grew. The villages and towns within a hundred miles became subject to the city and entered its protection. Though the Addríelim were few in number, none ever assailed them, for the city was stronger even than those of Ménerâch. It became a center of trade and produced luxuries for all its neighbors, and Anath grew jealous and tried often to bring the city under their power. But the worship of Eléos among the Addríelim was almost forgotten, not by decree but by neglect under the business of their labors.

## Maëkendrà

When Addríel was still a small village, Maëkil the Lost led the largest clan of the largest tribe of Adir Chlif. Now it happened that a terrible storm descended upon the hills, and out of the storm came the armies of Ménerâch. Maëkil did not know whether they followed the storm or called it forth by their power. He cast a spell to enrage the storm that it might destroy or confuse the enemy, but he could not control it. The winds became so strong and the lightnings so fierce that not only the invading army but most of his own people perished. In anguish, he and his daughters, who alone survived, fled south until the feet of the Ílloim (the Dark Hills). They despaired to go further, so they claimed the foothills for themselves and named the country Maëkendrà. So Maëkil and his daughters came together and begat new clans to fill the land. Thus the people were also called the Aërhêim, and no other peoples permitted their daughters to marry them.

## Uméthrâ

After the Sign of Wachüthmü, all who wished to explore, flee, or otherwise leave their lands, from Négzam to Maëkendrà, began to pass the Ílloim. Most at first passed by to the west into the woods of Míthaenim. In those forests was a great lake, less only than Oëluímuth, from which flowed a river further to the west, which is called Déan. There were food and water plenteous, and the trees were strong and tall. For almost a generation no settlers there dared clear any part of the wood, but they built dwellings for themselves in and among the trees. After many years the inhabitants began to clear small villages which did not endure. For the trees seemed to rise against them, growing thicker, faster, and taller wherever any had been cut. Though a few villages remained, the Uméthrâim became a people of tree dwellers. They build elaborate cities suspended in the trees so that, for the affluent, the ground became a place only for hunting. The poorest built their houses into the trunks of larger trees or by tying tents together from several trunks. In Uméthrâ Eléos was held in high honor, and His worship never died out. Yet many both rich and poor turned to the worship of the trees, and some of them reputed to be wise men held that Eléos was indeed the Spirit of the Trees.

## 

