# Of Teretz

Long ages ago, before the rise and fall of many empires, and before the cataclysm of Noah’s day, the world was not as it now is. For as we know the world, it is governed by strict laws of nature which do not yield to any power save that of the One who decreed them. In the far ancient times, however, these laws, the natural order, served only to uphold the creation, which they did not then rule. At that time men held another power, a gift from their Creator, by which they could add to the world in small measure their own order.

Men of this age know the natural order well but do not see so clearly the semiotic order, the order of meaning in which all things belong. For not only does a fire warm the body and burn the chaff, but truly it manifests, for the understanding of men, the consuming holiness of Him who first wrought its nature. Likewise do all things bear His imprint, and they are as words from His mouth, existing to reveal and to speak. No less does it belong to water to signify cleansing than to cool the tongue. So in the depths of the past it was possible to work by the order of meaning as easily as by the order of nature. By words, rites, and images, men could work great effects from the symbolic order, just as we now wield the natural order to perform what seems impossible.

So it was by his mastery of signs and meaning that a man could teach water which first flowed down a hill to instead flow into the air, or he could add to the nourishing powers of a berry healing effects. This kind of symbolic transfiguration might be called in present language “magic,” and it was good. The Creator gave this magic to men so that they might build upon His own work in the natural order. By mastering both magic and the use of the natural order, man would make the raw world into the vessel of the glory of their Maker.

But this did not come to pass. For in the deep past the first of men had heeded the words of Nrírhkü, known in our tongue as Lucifer. Nrírhkü taught him to rebel and to lay the world to waste rather than to glorify the Maker. In time, magic was much corrupted. Men became skilled in magic and in using nature, but for each skill they found use for evil as well as good.

Therefore after countless years of strife between making and unmaking, Nrírhkü inspired a man powerful in magic to pursue absolute domination by his art. This man named himself out of arrogance the Great Magician, but he spoke truly. For none before or after him could ever rival his ability in magic. With his skill he sought to claim all the world for his own, but many resisted. So began the Magician’s War.<a href="#fn1">[*]</a>

How long the Magician’s War lasted no soul ever knew, whether weeks, years, decades, or centuries. The magic which was devised at that time bent even time itself, so that a year could become an age, and an age could return to an ancient day. Cruelties of innumerable kinds were invented, and by magic the War came to include pains which always grew but never ceased, creatures of shadow and malice, deaths followed by resurrections and then repeated, treachery layered upon treachery so that not even memory could be trusted, and devastation upon all the lands of the world.

At long last, after what seemed to be millennia, six powerful and learned magicians determined to end the barbarity. In their many years of war they had advanced so far in magic as to nearly rival the Great Magician himself. Yet in a strange twist of providence, the Six concluded that magic itself was the root of all evils. They sought to rid the world of it. Therefore they gathered and increased all their strength by some deed which is only remembered as the Abomination. They cast their curse to remove all magic, and so came the Rending.

It was the Rending which sundered the world in two. Half of all creatures and all lands were removed from the world as it was then known to another realm. In this realm there was and could be no magic, and today we call it “Earth.” The other half of the world became known ever after as “Teretz.” There magic remained, along with half of the lands and half of the creatures. The Six found themselves on Earth with only half of a world, and they were grieved of their error.

Teretz and Earth, however, did not forget the union of their youth. By some means, perhaps the special work of the Creator, there remained connections between the two realms. These connections took the form of seven pools, and by these pools all the comings and goings between Teretz and Earth would come to take place. But for ages they lay hidden, and no man knew either on Teretz or on Earth of any way between the two. Soon Earth forgot of its brother, and now only whispers and rumors remain.

I, however, have been diligent to take account of all of these slight memories. Lore of the ancient affairs remains in the world, and all the more so since the Reconciliation began. Of these I have attempted to make orderly chronicle. This blog is for the telling of such tales as I have found them. I only hope that they will remind us all of the world beyond our own.

<a name="fn1">[*]</a> Those who know the lore of Teretz have sometimes attempted to identify this figure in the early chapters of Genesis, seeing in his war a connection with the great violence on the earth mentioned before the Flood (shortly before which, it is supposed, the Rending took place). However, even if he were a figure mentioned in the biblical account, there is almost no information by which such an identification could be substantiated.
